# scRNA_seq
A snakemake pipeline that can be used to analyze scRNA-seq data generated by 10x genomics. This pipeline can be used to analyze scRNA-seq, scVDJ-seq, and scCITE-seq. This pipeline works best when run on an lsf cluster.

Writen by Kristen Wells

There are two main steps in running this pipeline. The first is an automated snakemake pipeline that will run `Cellranger` on your samples. The second is a set of example scripts to follow for analysis

## Snakemake pipeline

1. Download and install miniconda3: For Linux
```{bash}
wget https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
```
2. Install Snakemake:
```{bash}
conda install snakemake -c bioconda -c conda-forge
```

3. Update the config file (config.yaml) 
>* RAW_DATA: Location of the raw data 
>* SAMPLES: the list of samples you want to test. This is the name that will be in the output files. The order must be identical to the order of RNA_SAMPLES, ADT_SAMPLES, and VDJ_SAMPLES
>* AGGR_SAMPLES: Which samples should be aggregated together at the end of the pipeline. These should be samples that were split between multiple 10x runs.
>* RNA_SAMPLES: The name of the RNA samples. Not the full fastq name, but the name that is the same for all samples. Likely ends in "GEX"
>* ADT_SAMPLES: *optional* The name of the samples from CITE-seq or hashtagging. If CITE-seq and hashtagging files are separate, include them both separated by a comma. Put samples in the same order as their RNA counterparts. If CITE-seq or hashtagging were not performed, leave this blank.
>* VDJ_SAMPLES: *optional* The name of the samples from VDJ-seq. Put samples in the same order as their RNA counterparts. If VDJ-sequencing was not peformed, leave this blank.
>* RESULTS: Path to the output directory
>* GENOME: Path to the cellranger genome reference
>* ADT_REF: *optional* Path to the ADT-reference. Should be a comma separated file with the columns described in the 10x tutorial: id, name, read, pattern, sequence, and feature_type. The feature_type will be Antibody Capture. The name will be the name in the final output matrix. Leave this blank if CITE-seq or hashtagging were not performed.
>* VDJ_REF: Path to the cellranger VDJ reference. If VDJ sequencing were not performed, leave this blank.
>* MAX_JOBS: The maximum number of jobs that can be submitted by cell ranger at a time
>* LSF_TEMPLATE: Path to an LSF template. One is included in this git repo.
>* CHEMISTRY: *optional* Arguments to the `--chemstiry` flag in cellranger count. If left blank, chemistry will be `auto`. Only use this if the pipeline failed because of a failure to detect the chemistry. Can be filled in for only some samples.

4. Update snakecharmer.sh to your specific cluster specs. 
>* change the -q argument to the queue you want to use 

5. submit the job using `bsub < snakecharmer.sh`

6. I highly recommend looking at the csv files that are generated and passed to cell ranger to ensure that the correct fastq files have been detected for each sample.


## R scripts

R scripts for the analysis are found in `src/scripts`. There are two directories here. One called `individual_analysis` includes scripts to process an individual sample. `intigrated_analysis` contains scripts to run analysis on multiple samples.

To run these scripts, you will need to install my custom analysis package `scAnalysisR`:

```R
install.packages("devtools")
library(devtools)
install_github("CUAnschutzBDC/scAnalysisR")
```

Scripts within each directory are numbered based on the order in which they should be run.

They include:

1. Steps for intial processing and filtering of the data
2. Steps for doublet removal
3. Steps for normalizing ADTs (if they are present in your data)
4. Steps for dimensional reduction with PCA and UMAP either on RNA alone or with ADTs included
5. Steps to name clusters based on references with `clustifyr`
6. Steps for marker detection
7. Steps for gene ontology and pathway analysis
8. Steps for integrating multiple samples
9. Steps for differential expression when multiple samples are present

For many of these steps, I've included different methods of performing them (for example batch correction can be done with `harmony` or `fastMNN`) and ways of comparing the different approaches so you can make an informed decision about what method is best for your samples.

For all scripts in this analysis, please make sure you understand the processing steps so you know what are the appropriate parameters for each step. These scripts are not intended to be run blindly with no understanding of the underlying algorithims.
